DUDES OF STUFF AND THINGS

Dudes of Stuff and Things is a turn-based strategy game, designed and
programmed by yours truly, Donald X. Vaccarino. This is a game of building
up heroes and castles, while fighting enemies and exploring a map. Your goal
is to eliminate all of the other players. You have to kill all of an enemy's
heroes and take all of his castles to beat him.

If you are familiar with similar games, you may not need to read this manual.
Print it out so you can refer to it later, and dive into a game. If you are
new to turn-based strategy, read on.

YOUR FIRST GAME

Run Dudes by executing DUDES.EXE. Ignore the options and just left click on
the right arrow in the bottom right of the screen. After it finishes
generating a map, ignore the next screen that comes up, and click on the
right arrow in the bottom right corner again.

Now you are playing Dudes. You have a randomly picked castle and hero, on a
random map. You are looking at the Map Screen, which shows you the fantasy
world your heroes are in (there is a chance your hero started with a skill
that makes you decide something at the start of the game. If so, just click
on the first option it gives you).

Left click on the castle. Now you are looking at your castle, via the Castle
Screen. The left half of the screen shows the buildings you've got - none so
far, just empty space and obstacles. Click on the hammer icon. A list of
buildings appears. Click on the square to the left of the first building
name (it will either be Shadows, Shrinking Men, Robots, Bunnies, Lab
Assistants, Scorpions, Rubber Rats, Urchins, Angry Villagers, or Magicians).
Then click on the lower hammer icon (not the one you already clicked on).
Now you've built a creature dwelling. Click on one of the + icons that showed
up. Now you've bought some creatures. That won't be enough. Do this again -
click on the hammer, then the square by the first monster name, then the
lower hammer, then one of the + icons. Now you've got more creatures. Okay.
Click on the cancel icon (the circle with a line through it).

Right click on some of the stuff near your castle, to see what it is. Some of
the nearby things will be piles of stuff. Left click on one. If you can't
reach it, nothing happens. If you can, a path of X's shows up, leading from
your hero, who is a guy on a horse, to the object. Click on it again. You
walk to the pile and pick it up. The lower right window says what you've
found.

Left click on a space adjacent to a nearby monster. The monsters are maroon.
You'll get a path of X's and then a sword icon (or just a sword if the
space is adjacent to your hero). Click again and you walk this path, and go
into combat. You will see a Combat Screen.

At any time during combat, it's either your turn or the computer's. When it's
the computer's turn, one of its monsters - the maroon ones - will be
highlighted, and you'll have to wait to see what the monster does. When it's
your turn, one of your monsters will be highlighted, and you can pick what
your monster does. Left click on a shadowed hex to move your monster there;
then click on an adjacent monster to attack it. If your monster has a range
attack, you can attack distant monsters without moving, but if you move you
will only be able to hit adjacent monsters.

Each monster will get its turn in order by their speed. At some point it
will be your hero's turn, either to shoot (if you have Archery) or to cast
a spell. When this happens, your hero's face appears on the right,
highlighted, and the computer waits for you to pick a spell. You can just
skip this by clicking on the hourglass icon.

Once you kill all of the opposing monsters, the battle is over. The monsters
vanish from the map, and you can now reach things that the monsters were
blocking, such as a Rock Quarry. Eventually you will run out of movement.
When you do, left click on the hourglass on the right edge of the screen, and
then left click on the hourglass in the lower right window. That ends your
turn. The computer will quickly take its turn, and then you'll get to go
again.

Spend the early turns picking stuff up, fighting the battles closest to your
castle, and flagging the Rock Quarries (by walking up to them and clicking
on them, on the left half). Visit buildings that give you a black X instead
of a black sword when you click on them; most of them make your hero better.
When you have enough money, buy a Bazaar in your castle; this will make you
more money. Build more Bazaars and more creature dwellings (and not just
the first one), buy the creatures, and take them with you to fight tougher
battles.

The remaining sections explain all of the different screens in detail, and
describe the monsters, skills, spells, and map locations.

OPTIONS

When you start the game, you can choose either to play a random map, a
random map from a template, load a saved game, or quit. You can also edit
your twists.

A random map may have 2, 3, 4, 6, or 8 players (5 and 7 don't work well with
the random map generator). These include both humans and computer players.
You can also choose a "loopiness" factor. This is how much the map is allowed
to have little loops - places where you can walk around in a circle. With
loopiness 1, you'll have a very maze-like map; with loopiness 5, you can end
up with a map with big open spaces, punctuated by small patches of obstacles.
Loopiness only controls the small loops - big loops will exist or not, as
needed to make the map fair, regardless of the loopiness setting.

Random maps are normally generated very quickly. However an 8-player map may
take a minute to generate.

A random map from a template is like a random map, except that the overall
layout of the map has been pre-defined in a file. You can choose which file
to use. The name of the file tells you a little about it; you also can see
how many players the map has, and how big the map is (100% is the maximum).
If you play the same template multiple times, it will be a little different
each time, although you will know the basic paths, and where all of the
castles are.

You can only have one game saved at once. It's saved in a file called
SAVEGAME.DAT, so if you really must, you can rename it to get more saved
games. When you pick Load Saved Game, you simply resume playing the saved
game from where it was saved.

Twists are a way to modify the basic rules of the game, to spice things up.
Don't play with any until you've played a few normal games. When you're
ready for twists, you can edit them by clicking on that arrow. This will
take you to a separate screen listing the twists. Each twist is either on,
off, or ?, toggled by left clicking. Choose on to always use this twist,
off to never have it, and ? to sometimes have it, picked randomly. Click on
the arrow to return to the options screen. From there you can choose how
many twists to use. That's how many random twists you'll have - always-on's
aren't counted. Twists can't be changed in the middle of a game. The specific
twists are detailed in a later section. The rest of the manual will explain
how the game works assuming that you have no twists.

Once you've picked what you want, click on the right arrow in the bottom
right corner of the screen. Unless you picked Load Saved Game, you will now
have a chance to fiddle with the starting positions. The screen shows data
on each of the players in the game. Data goes from left to right for a
single player.

First there's a flag, showing the color of that player. This color identifies
their heroes and buildings on the map.

Then there's a symbol that's either a guy or a computer. A guy means a human
player; a computer means an AI player. Click to toggle it. An all-AI game is
not allowed. If you only want one player, but don't want to be light blue,
simply turn player #1 into an AI player, and turn another player into a
human.

Next is your starting castle type, and icons showing what the creatures for
that castle type look like. Left click to pick a different castle type.

Next is your starting hero. Each player always starts with one castle and
one hero, positioned in the castle. You can have a random hero, or can
choose the specific hero you want. Each hero can only be owned by one
player. Heroes are associated with castles; there are 14 heroes per castle.
You can end up controlling heroes from different castle types over the
course of the game, but at the start, you have to pick a hero that
corresponds to your castle type. Next to the hero's picture, it shows that
hero's starting skills, starting spell, and friendly monster (the monster it
will summon if it gets a skill that summons monsters). You can right-click
on these for more information, and left click to pick a different hero.

Finally there's the difficulty setting. It's easy or normal. On easy you
start the game with a Mint, which means you'll be producing a lot more
resources then the other players. Normally, you want to leave everyone on
normal. For an easy game, put yourself on easy, leaving everyone else on
normal. For a hard game, put yourself on normal, and everyone else on easy.
You can also put everyone on easy, which will make for a normal game, only
one where everyone has more money.

Normally you will want to leave the AI players with the random castles that
they start out with, and random heroes too. However sometimes you may want
to change the AI players so that they all have different castles, for
variety, or else so that they all have the same castle type, for a different
kind of variety. You probably don't want to pick what heroes the AI players
start with, but you can if you want to.

Once you're happy with your choices, click on the right arrow in the lower
right corner of the screen, to start the game.

MAP SCREEN

This screen shows the fantasy world, and lets you move around in it.

Most of the screen shows part of the map. You can scroll with the arrow
keys, or right-clicking and dragging. Empty space is a solid color - usually
a shade of green, but sometimes snow-color or a dark desolate color. There
are also roads, which aren't functional (except that they tend to lead you
to other castles). There are obstacles: mountains, hills, different kinds of
trees and plants, water, chasms. There are buildings you can visit with your
heroes. There are also heroes, either yours or enemy ones, and neutral
monsters, which must be fought in order to pass them. You can right-click on
something to get hint text about it. If there's no hint, it's either empty
space or an obstacle, and either way it isn't very interesting.

The upper right shows a small picture of the whole map. You can left-click
on this as another way to scroll. You can right-click on it to toggle it
between showing terrain and just showing obstacles and visible heroes and
castles.

The middle right shows an icon for each of your heroes or castles. Click on
the hero icon (a guy on a horse) or hourglass to switch to heroes, or the
castle icon to switch to castles. Then click on the icon for an individual
hero or castle in order to center the map on that hero/castle, and click
again to go into the hero screen or castle screen. If you have more than 8
castles, the 9th spot will be an arrow, which you click on to get to the
next set of 8 castles. The hero icons are red-bordered when the hero is out
of movement.

The bottom right is a general purpose window. You can right click on it to
cycle through 3 windows - the active hero's troops (plus movement points and
spell points); your resources; and a window with an hourglass icon, which
you click on to end your turn, and a computer icon, which you click on to
get to the system window, from where you can save the game, reload, quit,
quit to the menu, and see the twists. You can also jump to a specific window
with those 3 icons above it - hero shows you the active hero's troops, castle
shows you your resources and the date, and hourglass shows you the hourglass
and computer. This window also shows hints that you get from right-clicking
on the map, unless they're too big to fit (then they open their own window).
During certain actions, like choosing a new skill, this window will show
information that is useful at that time.

As long as you have at least one hero, one of those heroes is active. When
you click on the map, that will make a path between the active hero and
that spot. Clicking again on the same hex will cause you to actually walk
down that path, as far as you can this turn. The path is made up of green
X's for the part you can travel this turn and red X's for parts you can
only reach on future turns. If a path ends in a sword, that's a fight; if
it ends in a black X, that's a location you can visit. If you click on an
unreachable location, that will clear the path.

You fight monsters by clicking next to them, not on them. You fight enemy
heroes and castles by clicking on the hero or castle. You fight map
locations with fights by clicking on them.

You can also left/right click on the active hero on the map to go into the
hero screen for that hero, and you can left/right click on one of your
castles on the map to go into the castle screen for that castle.

HERO SCREEN

This screen lets you see what your heroes are made of; it also lets you
rearrange your troops and artifacts.

The top left shows some basic information about your hero - name, level,
experience points, movement points, spell points. Name has no function.
Level is also meaningless; it's just a measure of your experience points.
Experience points are how you go up levels, which is how you learn new
skills; the number after the slash is how many experience points you need
to go up a level. Movement points are how many squares per turn your hero
can move on the map; the number after the slash is your total movement.
Spell points are used to cast spells in combat; the number after the slash
is your maximum spell points, and the number in parentheses is how many
spell points you can use each combat round. You can't have more spell
points than your maximum, except while fiddling with what artifacts your
hero is wearing on this screen (if you take off an artifact that increased
your maximum spell points, and leave this screen, your spell points will
then be reduced to your maximum).

Below that are your artifacts. You can wear 15 artifacts, and can also carry
30 artifacts in your backpack. A few artifacts can't be worn; they just stay
in your backpack. The rest can be worn. Click on an artifact to take it off
or put it on; an artifact you can wear will only be wearable in one kind of
position; for example a Ring of +1 Power must be worn in one of your two
Ring slots. If you have no space in your backpack, or are already wearing
as many of that kind of artifact as you can wear, then clicking on an
artifact just highlights it; then click on the artifact you want to exchange
it with, to put it on or take it off. If your backpack is full, you may end
up wearing an artifact that you can't remove. Only 15 artifacts in your
backpack are displayed at once; if there are more, an arrow will appear,
and click on it to get to the other 15.

Below the artifacts are your troops. Click on a troop to highlight or
unhighlight it. While it's highlighted, you can click on another slot to
exchange that stack with that other stack (or empty space). You can also
click on the icons to manipulate the stack. The <guy / 1> icon splits off
just 1 monster from the stack. The <guy / guy> icon splits off half of the
stack. The <guy / N> icon divides all monsters of that type equally among
all stacks of that monster type, and all empty stacks. The <tombstone> icon
just turns red. Click on it again to dismiss the highlighted stack.

The upper right shows your skills. To the left are your blue skills and to
the right your yellow skills. See Hero Skills for an explanation of them.
Only skills learned normally are displayed here; for example skills gained
from artifacts are not. If the hero doesn't have Summoning, the monster he
would summon is listed under the blue skills.

Below that are your spells. They are sorted by level. A green spell works
on friendly troops, a red one on enemies, and a gray one on both. Spells
are only usable during combat.

Below that there may be one or two hero faces, which you can click on to
switch to looking at your previous or next hero, if any; and there's a
cancel icon, which gets you out of this screen.

You can right click on an artifact, skill, spell, or monster stack, to find
out what it does. For spells you will see what the spell does for this
specific hero, not what the base spell does. For monsters you will see how
good the monsters are for this hero, which may not be the same as how good
they are for other heroes.

You can't choose the order that artifacts are in in your backpack. They are
always sorted into a particular order.

You can reach this screen from some information windows. If you do, you
won't be able to modify your troops or artifacts then. Your hero is either
in the middle of something, or it isn't even your hero. You can do
everything if you reach the screen normally, such as from the adventure map.

CASTLE SCREEN

This screen lets you build new buildings in your castles, buy troops,
transfer troops to your visiting heroes, buy new or defeated heroes, and
trade resources.

The upper left area shows your castle's buildings. It's an 8 by 8 grid.
Some buildings take up multiple squares. At the start of a game, your
castle will have 4 (sometimes fewer) squares with obstacles, and the rest
will be open space. When you take over a neutral castle, it will sometimes be
an outpost, which means it will have a lot more obstacles.

The lower left shows troops stationed at the castle, and a visiting hero
if any, and his troops. You can click on the icons to split up troops,
like on the Hero Screen. You can click on the hero to go to the Hero Screen
for that hero. The down arrow moves the "best" troops stationed at the castle
into the visiting hero's army.

The upper right has icons for doing different things in the castle; the
space below shows different things depending on what you're doing (and at
the very bottom, your resources are displayed). Icons are blacked out when
they won't do anything. Click on the icons to do the following actions:

1. Two little guys - buy troops. Click on the + at the top to buy all
   troops you can afford, starting with the most expensive ones. Click on
   a + to the right of a monster to buy all of that monster that you can;
   click on 1 to buy just one of that monster. The monsters go into the
   visiting hero's army if possible, or else into the castle's stationed
   troops.

2. Mallet - build buildings. First you get a list of buildings to build.
   To the left is the shape of each building (the pattern of squares it
   will fill up on the grid); next to that is the building name. If the
   building name is white, you can build it. If it's light gray, you can't
   build it because you can't afford it, and the resources you need are
   listed to the right of the name. If it's dark gray, you can't build it
   because it doesn't fit anywhere on your grid.

   Click on a building's shape. Now the screen displays the name of the
   building, its cost, some information about it, and some additional
   icons. The grid now shows an outline of your building, positioned
   somewhere that it can go (if there is such a place). If you can't afford
   the building, the resources you lack will be highlighted. If you can't
   place the building anywhere, some of the sections of building on the
   grid will be ghosted. If you can afford it and can fit it, you can build
   it; there are no other requirements.

   The curvy arrow lets you rotate the shape. The <-> arrow lets you invert
   the shape left-right. The mallet lets you build it, if the shape is
   currently positioned somewhere that it can go. The head lets you plan it;
   it will be placed on the grid, ghosted, but won't actually be built;
   you're just mentally reserving space for later. You can remove a planned
   building by right-clicking on it or building/planning over it. Plans
   vanish if an enemy takes your castle.

   You can left click on the grid to position the building. Do this. Use
   the arrow icons to rotate and mirror the shape until you've got it where
   you want, rotated how you want it. Then click on the mallet to actually
   build.

3. Bolt - view spells. This simply shows you what spells are available in
   this castle. Any hero visiting the castle learns them all.

4. Hero - buy hero. This is how you get more heroes. You can only have 8
   heroes total. You can choose between two new heroes, or your two best
   defeated heroes (if any). The new heroes will correspond to this castle's
   type, until all 14 of those heroes are hired (then you can still buy
   new heroes, but they will correspond to some other castle type). Heroes
   cost 2500 gold. When you hire a defeated hero, he usually has only 1
   movement and no spell points. You can right click on a hero's picture to
   see more information about that hero (although, for new heroes, all of
   the relevant information is already displayed).

5. $ - trade resources. Click on the pictures in the top two lines to pick
   what to trade and what to trade it for, or click on the pictures separated
   by the arrow to rotate through the possibilities. Click on the 1, 5, or 10
   to actually do the trade, of the resources indicated by the arrow, once,
   at the exchange rate displayed.

6. Castle left/right - switch castles. This simply switches you to the
   previous or next castle you own, without leaving this screen.

7. Cancel - exit the castle screen.

The different kinds of castle buildings are:

1. Creature dwellings. There are 6 of these for each castles. They produce
   creatures daily, at a particular rate. The more expensive the creature,
   the less you get per day. Fractions are remembered. Most of your castle
   will consist of these buildings.

2. Spell Crypt / Spell Tower. These buildings teach your heroes spells. The
   Spell Crypt teaches 2 1st level and 2 2nd level spells; the Spell Tower
   teaches 2 3rd level and 2 4th level. Each successive building you build
   is guaranteed to provide spells you didn't have already, until you have
   a full set of 5 Spell Crypts and 4 Spell Towers. Heroes have to visit the
   castle to learn the spells from it.

3. Bazaar / Mint. These buildings make you money daily. A castle produces
   500 gold / day by itself. The Bazaar gets you an additional 500 gold / day,
   and the Mint makes 2500 gold / day. The Mint is a better deal in every
   respect, except that you have to save up money longer to build it; you
   will usually build multiple Bazaars instead.

4. Mine. A particular type of mine, such as are found on the map, can be
   built in each castle. What kind of mine you can build depends on your
   castle type.

5. Barbican. This defends your castle when it's attacked. It deals 100 damage
   at the start of each combat round, to a deserving enemy (you don't control
   it). Barbicans can normally only be destroyed by the Grenade spell or the
   Cloud Giant's attack. A castle can only have 12 functioning Barbicans; any
   more are just decoration.

6. Treasury. This holds a crown artifact, for when you somehow acquire one.
   There are several kinds of crown artifacts. When you get one, take it to
   one of your castles and build a Treasury. Then click on your hero, and
   click on the artifact, and choose to leave it. It will be built into your
   castle (filling up the Treasury), and will give some exciting benefit to
   the owner of the castle (which will be you unless an enemy takes the
   castle).

COMBAT SCREEN

This is the screen that shows up whenever one of your heroes attacks
something, or whenever one of your heroes is attacked. You fight it out.
If you win, you get experience, and have defeated whatever it was. If you
lose, your hero must be rehired at a castle (or abandoned).

The left two-thirds of the screen is the battlefield. Empty hexes will be the
color of the terrain you're fighting on. There are obstacles, like on the
adventure map. There are also special obstacles, and dangerous terrain. The
battlefield is a hex grid, even though the hexes are displayed as squares.

Monsters are blue for the attacker, maroon for the defender; the little
number in the corner is how many monsters are in a stack. The number is
white normally. If the number is red, the monster has a bad spell affecting
it (or spell-like ability); if the number is green, the monster has a good
spell affecting it. It's yellow for both. Conjured creatures (which aren't
kept at the end of combat) have a black outline.

Combat proceeds as a series of combat rounds, in which each monster and
hero gets a turn. At any given time, it's some monster or hero's turn, and
that monster/hero is displayed in the mid-right.

You take a monster's turn by simply clicking on the hex you want the monster
to move to, if any, and then clicking on the adjacent hex you want the
monster to attack, if any. If a monster moves to a hex from which it can't
attack, you automatically skip the attack. If a monster can attack without
moving (either because it's adjacent to an enemy, or because it has a range
attack), you can skip moving and just attack.

A movement shadow shows you where the active monster can move. The reachable
hexes are all darker. You can also right click on a monster to see its stats
(in the lower right), and to see where it can move to. This will be indicated
by the hex being bordered with dark gray instead of light gray. You can right
click on an empty hex to stop tracking the last monster you right clicked on.
When a monster has more than 5 abilities or effects on it, right-click on
"More" to see the rest. The lower right will show a log of events happening
in combat when it isn't showing a tracked monster.

When you're picking what hex to attack, monsters will go dark if they'd be
damaged as a result of attacking the hex the mouse arrow is hovering over.
Sometimes an attack will be complicated and you will see that a stack will
be damaged even though it isn't obvious why. For the random chain lightning
effect of Electric Eels, hexes that are only sometimes going to be damaged
won't be as dark. When you're picking what hex to move to, monsters will go
dark if they'd be damaged, or have the terrain of their hex changed, as a
result of that move. This applies to Steamrollers and Flying Slugs, and to
other situations you can generate via spells or twists.

Some monsters can attack empty hexes, and sometimes such a monster will
have the option of moving to a hex that it also has the option of attacking.
If you left-click on such a hex, it won't be clear which action you intend
to do. So, the hex will be divided diagonally, and show a boot and a sword.
Click on the side that corresponds to what you want to do - the boot if you
want to move to the hex, the sword if you want to attack it.

The upper right has an hourglass icon. This is used when you want a monster
or hero to do nothing. You can also use it after moving, if you want the
monster to move to a hex but then not attack an adjacent monster. Yes, this
will actually come up. You also click on the hourglass to stop selecting
spell targets if you can select more but don't wish to.

There is also a tombstone icon, which you can click on to concede the battle.
You can also do this with the Escape key; either way it will ask if you're
sure. You will almost never want to do this, unless you are quitting the
game. Any monsters that you kill before dying will stay dead, whether on the
map or in a hero or castle's army (but not in a Fort or Dwelling). You gain
nothing by conceding. You might as well fight to the bitter end.

Below the icons, the faces of the one or two heroes involved in this
battle are displayed, and a flag for a side with no hero. Right-click on the
face or flag to have the tracked-monster movement shadow (the hex border)
show where all monsters on that side combined can move. That is, you will
see every hex that at least one monster on that side can move to.

The heroes are not on the battlefield, but they are involved; the attacking
hero is somewhere off to the left of the battlefield, and the defending hero,
if any, to the right; from there they can cast spells and sometimes shoot.

When it's a hero's turn, the space below the faces, which normally shows a
monster, will show a hero instead. If it's that hero's turn to shoot (using
the Archery skill), simply click on the enemy stack you want to shoot. If
you want to skip using Archery, click on the hourglass.

If it's a hero's turn to cast spells, you will see a list of spells below
the hero's picture. It will also say "Spells Page 1" and will show the
hero's spell points remaining for this round (before the slash), and total
spell points (after the slash).

Click on "Spells Page 1" to page through your hero's spells (if you have
more than one page of spells). Right click on a spell to see what it does
(this will take into account your hero's skills and artifacts). The list
of spells also indicates how many spell points a spell costs (to the right
of the spell name), and sometimes extra cryptic information about the spell
(even further to the right). This extra information is the % strength of
the spell, or how much damage it deals; it's a short version of what you
get when right clicking on the spell, and is useful once you're familiar
with the spells. Left click on a spell to cast it.

If a spell costs more spell points than you have, it isn't even displayed
in the list; you can't cast it. If a spell requires more spell points than
you have available this round, but less than your total spell points, then
you can cast the spell, but it won't resolve this round. You will spend as
many spell points as you can on it this round, and automatically continue
spending spell points on it next round, and when you've finally spent its
cost, it will resolve. Spells which won't resolve this round have gray text
to the right of them, instead of white text. If combat ends before the spell
resolves, you are still out the spell points you've already spent on it.

Yes, you will sometimes cast spells even though they don't resolve right
away. Normally you can only spend 15 spell points per round. Spells that cost
20 or more spell points are often worth waiting a round for.

Some spells have targets. After you cast the spell (or when it finally
resolves), you choose the targets. Normally you just get one target; click
on the target, and the spell will be cast. If you can choose multiple
targets, click on each target that you want. Until you've clicked on your
full allotment of targets, you can keep clicking on new targets, and can also
click on an previously-clicked target to unselect it. You can click on the
hourglass to stop picking targets when you haven't picked all that you are
entitled to. If a good or evil spell with targets can target every friend or
enemy in the battle, and will do the full effect to each target (it doesn't
have a strength determined by Power or Witchcraft) it will do so
automatically, without you having to click on them.

You can keep casting spells as long as you have more spell points usable
this round. If you don't want to cast a spell, click on the hourglass.

There are special terrains that sometimes appear. Fire is red. It deals
200 damage to a stack that starts its turn in the Fire. Water is blue. If
a non-flying stack starts a turn in water, its movement is halved.

There are also special obstacles. In a castle battle, there will be gates
and sometimes barbicans. A gate can be walked through by the defenders, but
is an obstacle to the attackers, who can attack it. Each attack will weaken
it at least a little; when enough damage has been done to it, it will
disappear. A barbican deals 100 damage to an attacking stack at the start of
a combat round. The defending player (if any) does not control them.

At the end of the battle, if you won, you get experience. If you were
attacking some neutral monsters on the map, they are gone. If you were
attacking a Dwelling, it is now no longer guarded; if you were attacking a
Fort, you get its treasure. If you were attacking a castle, it's yours now.
If you were fighting a hero, that hero is defeated and leaves the map, and
you take that hero's artifacts.

A defeated hero gets no experience, and is reduced to 1 movement and 0 spell
points. Defeated heroes can be rehired by the player who originally hired
them, in any of that player's castles. No other player can ever get them.

Sometimes you will fight a hero or castle with no army. In that case the
combat screen appears, then immediately disappears, and the battle is over.

HERO TALK SCREEN

This is the screen that shows up when one of your heroes walks up to another
one of your heroes, and clicks to visit. It lets you exchange troops and
artifacts between your heroes.

The top half of the screen shows one of the heroes, and the bottom half the
other. The troop-manipulation icons from the Hero Screen are present. Click
on an hero's face to go to the Hero Screen for that hero (you often do this
in order to take off or wear artifacts). Click on an artifact to give it to
the other hero; if there is no space in the other hero's backpack, the
artifact is highlighted instead, and you have to click on an artifact to
exchange it with. Click on a creature stack to highlight it; you can use the
troop-manipulation icons for that hero, or can click on a stack in the other
hero's army in order to exchange the stacks (and you can exchange a stack
with an empty slot).

Click on the down arrow icon for the top hero, to give the bottom hero the
best troops out of the combined troops of both heroes. "Best" is judged the
way the AI does it - by total gold piece cost. You will sometimes want to
keep a stack in your "good" army even if it isn't the better stack (for
example if you have Summoning and it's producing that creature type). The
up arrow icon does the same thing in reverse. The cancel icon in the lower
right corner gets you out of the screen.

GAZETEER

Following is a guide to the objects and locations you can visit.

Objects You Pick Up

These are all things that you touch to pick up, whereupon they vanish from
the map.

- Resources. These are just piles of resources - gold, rocks, apples,
  emeralds, quartz, beakers, or clay.
- Chest. This gives you a choice between gold or experience. In the early
  game, always take the gold.
- Barrel. This either gives you some resources, or flags a distant mine or
  Tower for you.
- Bag. Sometimes this gives you a bag of junk, baubles, or jewelry, which
  goes in your backpack, and can be sold at a castle. Sometimes this gives
  you a choice between an artifact or experience.
- Potion. Sometimes this gives you one level of a blue skill that you already
  have. Sometimes this gives all of your heroes extra movement and spell
  points (one time only). Sometimes this lets you pick one of your stacks
  of monsters, and upgrades that stack to the next highest level monster.
  Sometimes this combines two artifacts you've got into one artifact.
- Artifact. This is some trinket that will improve your hero. It normally
  has to be worn to do anything. It will automatically be worn when you pick
  it up, unless you are have no room in the matching slot type. You can't
  just right-click on it on the map to see what it does; you'll have to get
  one to know what it does.
- Friendly Creatures. Blue creatures on the map will join your army. You
  have to have space for them.

Battles

These are things that send you to the Combat Screen to fight a battle.

- Monster. A maroon monster is something you have to fight to get by. You
  can't step into hexes adjacent to the monster without fighting it. You
  will always want to right click on the monster first to see how many
  monsters there are (roughly). Note that the monsters may be accompanied
  by some monsters of the next highest level, or, for 6th level monsters,
  by big stacks of 1st level monsters.
- Hero. Friendly heroes can be talked to (letting you trade artifacts and
  troops). Enemy heroes are fought.
- Castle. Friendly castles can be visited (to pick up troops and learn
  spells). Enemy and neutral castles must be fought. Sometimes an enemy
  hero or castle will have no troops; those battles are easy. Neutral
  castles have no defense during the first week of the game. Some neutral
  castles will be "outposts;" this means they have a lot more obstacles than
  a normal castle.
- Fort. These are special battles. You get a unique battlefield, fight a
  generally tough battle, and win gold and an artifact. If you lose, the
  fort replenishes its troops. If you win, the Fort is then empty, and can
  no longer be fought.

Locations You Visit Once Per Hero

These are locations that each hero can only usefully visit once.

- School. This teaches your hero a skill. If you already have that skill,
  you get another level of it, unless it's a yellow skill that you are maxed
  out for. If you don't have the skill, and already have the maximum number of
  skills you can of that type, you don't get anything.
- Spell Pavilion. This teaches your hero a spell. If you already know the
  spell, nothing happens. You won't know what spell a Spell Pavilion teaches
  until at least one hero visits it.
- Monument. This gives your hero experience. The amount of experience varies
  based on the relative difficulty of the area of the map where the Monument
  is.
- Sage Hut. This gives your hero experience, equal to the full amount needed
  for you to go from your current level (ignoring the extra experience you
  have) to the next level. So you always gain a level. If you are close to
  going up a level anyway, don't worry, you aren't gypped - you get the
  amount for the whole level, not the remaining portion.

Locations You Flag

These are locations you claim for your color. They get a flag showing that
they're yours, and/or change to your color. While they're yours they do
something for you continually. But another player's heroes can come along and
take them away from you.

- Mines. These produce resources at the start of your turn. There is one
  type for each type of resource - gold, rocks, apples, emeralds, quartz,
  beakers, clay.
- Tower. This gives all of your heroes +1 of a particular blue skill, while
  it's flagged. This applies even if your hero doesn't have that skill
  normally, or already has a full set of blue skills.
- Shaman's Hut. This gives all of your heroes +1 spellcasting speed while it's
  flagged (it also applies to archery speed).
- Magician's Home. This improves spellcasting for all of your heroes while
  it's flagged. Spells that deal damage will do 20% more damage; spells with
  a % will have 20% greater %; summoning spells summon 20% more; spells with
  a duration get +1 duration; and other spells are 1 spell point per level
  cheaper. A spell qualifying for two of these bonuses only gets one (the
  first listed).
- Wizard's House. This lets all of your heroes spend an extra +5 spell points
  per combat round, while it's flagged.
- House of Husbandry. This increases your castle creature production while
  it's flagged. Each of your castles produces +5 gp per day per square of
  creatures of the level corresponding to the House's level (which you can
  see by right-clicking).

Locations You Visit Repeatedly

These are places you will want to visit over and over.

- Farmstead. This pays 1000 gold, once per week. The gold icon goes dark to
  show when it's paid up.
- Miner. This pays 5 resources of a random type, once per week. The pickaxe
  icon goes dark to show when it's paid up.
- Dwelling. A higher-level Dwelling starts off as a battle, and has a red
  picture of a monster. Once you've fought the battle (which is easy), or if
  there is no battle, the Dwelling sells the pictured monster type (and the
  icon is blue). The Dwelling gets fresh monsters each week on day 1. If
  it's sold out, the icon is dark gray.
- Horde Dwelling. This is like a Dwelling, but you to have to fight for it
  every week, and it sells 40 1st level creatures that match the castle type
  of the visiting hero. The creatures always match the visiting hero, even if
  some of them were bought by a different type of hero.
- Shrine. This gives your hero +2 of the pictured blue skill, for 3 days, or
  until you visit another Shrine.
- Altar. This gives all creatures in this hero's army a special ability in
  combat, for 3 days, or until you visit another Altar. The abilities are
  better in more difficult map areas.
- Junk Merchant. First, your hero can sell all of his Bags of junk/baubles/
  jewelry, for a worse-than-usual price, and can sell low-level artifacts
  for 1500 gold each. Then, you can buy a random mid-level artifact. The
  artifact changes each week; you can visit the Junk Merchant again to buy
  multiple copies of the artifact. The price for the artifacts goes up each
  time one is bought.
- Library. This teaches your hero a magic-related skill and two spells. If
  you can't learn part of the lesson (due to not having room for the skill,
  or already knowing the spells), it doesn't tell you this. The skill and
  spells change each week. You can visit the Library multiple times to learn
  the same skill repeatedly; the price goes up each time.
- Academy. This converts a stack of monsters to the next highest level type
  of monster. It only converts monsters of a particular level, indicated
  when you right click on the Academy. You have to pay twice the difference
  in value between the original stack and the new stack.

Locations You Visit Once Ever

These are locations which are completely useless after visiting them once.

- Watchtower. This reveals an area of the map.
- Hermit Cave. This teaches your hero a unique ability, only available from
  Hermit Caves. Each hermit cave can only be used once, and each hero can
  only learn from one hermit. There are four possible abilities; you will
  have to visit some Hermits to find out what they are.

CREATURES

This section details the creature abilities, by castle type. Each castle has
6 creatures, from 1st to 6th level.

Circus

1. Magicians. Flying. When a good spell is cast on another stack, the
   Magicians copy it onto themselves.
2. Ringmasters. Range. When the Ringmasters attack a stack, they teleport it
   next to them.
3. Clown Cars. Instead of moving/attacking, the Clown Cars can create a
   stack of random 1st level monsters, with one monster per Clown Car. You
   don't keep these monsters at the end of combat. Just click on the
   hourglass if you want them to make creatures for their turn.
4. Lions. Attacks 3 times. The attacks can be on different monsters, but the
   Lion only gets to move once.
5. Elephants. Moves 4 hexes over its speed, and tramples over a line of
   attacked monsters. The Elephants hit every monster in a line, until coming
   to an empty hex or an obstacle or edge. If there was an empty hex on the
   other side, the Elephants move there.
6. Fire-eaters. Attacks 2 hexes in each direction, without damaging friendly
   stacks.

Clown Cars are effectively a range troop. The monsters they make can clog up
the battlefield for you while you make more of them; in the early game this
can be really strong. Ringmasters sometimes have a penalty - you don't want
to pull the monster over - but sometimes it's a bonus - you pull over a stack
and then hit it with your other guys. Put them in the middle of your army
instead of at the edge like a normal range troop. Elephants have a speed of 4
but move 8 hexes; this is often a bonus, letting you get the first hit in,
but is bad against shooters. Circus heroes start with two yellow skills
instead of the usual blue skill and yellow skill.

City Of Shadows

1. Shadows. Flying. For every 5 Shadows in your army that die, your hero
   gains 2 spell points. Shadows are produced by the Dark Arts skill.
2. Soul Thieves. When a Soul Thief attacks a unit, that unit loses its
   abilities for the rest of combat (the Soul Thief doesn't gain them
   though). The Soul Thief doesn't remove abilities granted by spells.
   Soul Thieves are produced by Necromancers.
3. Horrors. Each time a stack of Horrors is damaged in combat, it gains
   +1 speed, +2 damage, and +2 hit points, for the rest of combat.
4. Necromancers. Range. When the last creature in a stack is killed by
   Necromancers, you gain a Soul Thief where the dead creature was, and
   keep it after combat if you have space in your army.
5. Evil Fogs. Flying. When Evil Fogs damage a unit, that unit can't move
   the next time it would normally get to. It can still attack though.
6. Death Puppets. When the last creature in a stack is killed by Death
   Puppets, the Death Puppets get to go again, once per combat round.

This castle's low-level creatures are strong. You will find yourself trying
to get your opponent to kill your Shadows, so you can get the spell points.
Even a single Soul Thief can drastically reduce the power level of an enemy
stack. Horrors are unexciting in small quantities, but a big stack of them
can be very hard to deal with. Necromancers are also strong, but the building
is hard to pay for and hard to place. Obviously any army with Necromancers is
going to want to reserve space for Soul Thieves. When playing this castle,
you'll want Dark Arts more than usual, since it makes your kind of creature.
Persuasion is good, since you'll have Shadows, and can thus take Shadows from
enemy heroes with Dark Arts.

Cloud Castle

1. Shrinking Men. Shrinking Men take only 10% of the damage from non-melee
   sources, such as spells, range attacks, and attacks that hit multiple
   hexes (and aren't aimed directly at the Shrinking Men).
2. Witches. Range, but only one shot per combat. When Witches damage a
   unit, that unit becomes hexed for the rest of combat. A hexed unit has
   -1 speed, -2 damage, and -2 hit points. Being hexed isn't cumulative.
3. Will-o-wisps. Flying. When Will-o-wisps are damaged, they teleport to
   a random empty hex.
4. Dancing Swords. Flying. Whenever a spell is cast in combat (even via
   Djinns or an artifact), Dancing Swords get +1 speed, +2 damage, and +2 hit
   points, for the rest of combat. They only get the bonus once for a spell
   that's split with Sorcery.
5. Illusionists. Range. At the start of combat, 2 illusion copies of each
   stack of Illusionists appear. Each time Illusionists take a turn in combat,
   they then may randomly switch places with one of the illusion stacks, if
   one remains. An illusion stack disappears if it takes any damage. Spells
   that don't deal damage don't affect an illusion stack. Illusions always
   look like the stack they're copying, including spell effects and how many
   creatures are left.
6. Cloud Giants. Cloud Giants attack in all directions, and destroy any
   obstacles they attack (but not fire or water).

Shrinking Men are tough, and very annoying to face in the early game. You will
want to split your Witches up into as many stacks as possible, since it only
takes one Witch to hex a stack. This makes Leadership a good choice for Cloud
Castle heroes. You will also want Wizardry or Lore to make your Dancing Swords
get better faster. The Will-o-wisp ability is half bonus half penalty; the
Wisps are very fast, which somewhat compensates. Illusionists are strong, but
can block your own creatures in on certain battlefields; put fliers or
shooters next to them in your army.

Evil Temple

1. Angry Villagers. Short-range range attack - only hits enemies within 6
   hexes.
2. Skulks. Can switch places with any other monster as its move.
3. Priests. Per Priest, gives +50 gp Persuasion, +35 gp Healing after combat,
   and heals each stack 1 hit point per combat round.
4. Vile Ducks. Flying. When Vile Ducks damage a stack, they cast a random
   low-level evil spell on them.
5. Werewolves. When Werewolves deal damage, it's rounded up to kill a whole
   monster. When the last creature in a stack is killed by Werewolves, the
   Werewolves increase in hit points, damage, and speed and gain an ability:
   1) Retaliate (as per Wobbler); 2) Disease (similar to Witch ability); 3)
   Poison (as per Scorpion); 4) Stun (as per Evil Fog).
6. Serpent Angels. Flying. At the start of a Serpent Angel's turn, it casts a
   random high-level beneficial spell on a random friendly stack.

Angry Villagers can't just attack in the first round like a real range unit,
but the ability to shoot even only at short range is often useful. Skulks are
tricky; they can get at faraway monsters, teleport a monster into danger, or
save a monster from danger. Vile Ducks are nasty but vulnerable. Serpent
Angels are very strong when they cast their spells on your good stacks; but
they're also the most expensive creature in the game. The Evil Temple has no
real range unit, but has fast monsters to compensate. Leadership is especially
good, as four of your monsters do something that's useful if you have even a
single creature of that type, and the Priest's Persuasion gets better with
more army slots. Evil Temple heroes start with two blue skills, instead of
the usual blue skill and yellow skill.

Factory

1. Robots. Range, but only in a straight line. There has to be a straight
   horizontal or diagonal line between an enemy and the Robots for them to
   use their Range attack. They don't have to hit the first enemy in
   line-of-sight, though.
2. Wobblers. After a Wobbler is melee attacked, it retaliates, with a free
   attack against the attacker. It doesn't retaliate against non-melee
   attacks, including spells, range attacks, and attacks that hit multiple
   hexes (and aren't aimed directly at the Wobblers). The retaliation itself
   is not a melee attack.
3. Whirlies. Flying. Whirlies get a free attack prior to moving. Then they
   get a normal turn, consisting of an optional move and optional attack.
   So they can attack twice, but only if the first attack can be made without
   moving.
4. Transformers. During odd-numbered combat rounds (including the 1st round),
   Transformers have flying. During even-numbered rounds, they have a range
   attack.
5. Steamroller. Steamrollers can move over enemies (but not friendly units)
   as if they had flying. Any enemy moved over in this way is attacked by the
   Steamroller. This is not a melee attack. The Steamroller still gets to
   make its normal attack after moving. When you hover the mouse cursor over
   a hex you might want to move your Steamrollers to, any enemies that will
   be attacked by that move will be shadowed, as with attacks.
6. Lasers. Range. Lasers turn the hex they attack to fire. Fire deals 200
   damage to a unit that starts its turn in it.

Robots are the weakest 1st level creature; don't expect them to get to shoot
too often. Wobblers are tough but slow. So with this castle you tend to focus
on Whirlies and up, which are all solid creatures. Transformers are very
defensive for a range unit. Steamrollers are hard to get the bonus out of,
but still very nice. Lasers are great to have just a few of; they aren't so
bad to have tons of, but you only get the fire once per attack.

Jungle Fort

1. Bunnies. Bunnies can jump over adjacent obstacles; if they jump they can't
   keep moving afterwards that round (but can still attack). On day 1 of each
   week, each stack of Bunnies in a hero's army grows by 10%. Bunnies on the
   map also grow faster than other monsters. Bunnies in castles, and
   unpurchased Bunnies, do not get this bonus.
2. Giant Frogs. Range, but only vs. flying creatures. Giant Frogs jump, like
   Bunnies do.
3. Mad Turtles. At the start of each combat round after the 1st, each stack
   of Mad Turtles gains +1 speed, +2 damage, and +2 hit points, for the rest
   of combat.
4. Fungi. Fungi can teleport to any hex adjacent to a Fungus, Carnivorous
   Plant, or tree obstacle. They can't keep moving after teleporting (but can
   still attack).
5. Carnivorous Plants. Range. Carnivorous Plants can't move and go last, even
   if they have all sorts of speed bonuses.
6. Kongs. When Kongs attack an enemy, that enemy is teleported (thrown) to a
   random empty hex.

The Jungle Fort has no flying creatures, but kind of gets around this by
having two jumping creatures and the teleporting Fungi. It also doesn't have
a range unit until 5th level, although the Giant Frogs function as ranged
units in lots of battles. That sounds like a bad combination, but the Jungle
Fort units are pretty tough (except the Bunnies), and range attacks aren't as
good as they are in most games. Split up your Fungi into multiple stacks;
this will let them hit monsters that thought they were standing just out of
range. Mad Turtles are exceptional in longer battles and solid in short ones.

Laboratory

1. Lab Assistants. Range, with a one hex area-of-effect. This attack can
   damage friendly units. Lab Assistants can attack an empty hex, obstacle,
   or friendly unit, as long as one of the adjacent hexes contains an enemy.
   Lab Assistants don't damage themselves when they are in range.
2. Pygmy Dragon. Flying. Pygmy Dragon attacks also hit the next hex beyond
   the attacked hex (breath weapon), even if that hex has a friendly stack.
   That extra attack is not a melee attack. Pygmy Dragons can attack an empty
   hex, obstacle, or friendly unit, as long as the next hex has an enemy.
3. Mimics. When Mimics damage another unit in combat, they gain that unit's
   abilities for the rest of combat. This is cumulative. Gained abilities
   apply immediately, including abilities that cause something to happen when
   the unit attacks.
4. Blobs. When Blobs are damaged, they split into 2 stacks (if there's room
   and more than 1 Blob). They reform into one stack at the end of combat.
5. Headlesses. Headlesses attack in all directions. They can damage friendly
   units this way.
6. Mad Scientists. When Mad Scientists damage a unit, that unit is replaced
   by the next lowest level unit for the same castle type, for the rest of
   combat. This is cumulative; units can't go below 1st level. Surviving
   units revert to normal at the end of combat.

Several of these units can hurt your own troops; watch out! Be especially
careful with your Mimics, which will sometimes have abilities you've forgotten
about. Mimics are worth the risk, though; they can become awesome monsters
from hell, when facing multiple kinds of enemies. Mad Scientists are the
deadliest unit in the game; a single Mad Scientist can effectively inflict
any amount of damage, although you do still have to kill off the "devolved"
units. The Blob ability is a penalty; Blobs have solid stats, but so many
creatures have a good plan against them, that you usually won't want them.
Lab Assistants do very little damage, and are very slow, but they're still a
first level range unit; they're strong in the early game. Offense is
especially nice with this castle, since the bonus rounds up; even +1 damage
drastically improves Lab Assistants.

Pyramid

1. Scorpions. When Scorpions damage a unit, or are damaged by a unit, that
   unit becomes poisoned for the rest of combat. Poison deals damage to the
   poisoned unit at the start of its turn; the damage is equal to 2 times the
   number of Scorpions that damaged the unit. If less Scorpions damage the
   same unit later, that doesn't lower the amount of poison.
2. Mummies. When Mummies are damaged, they immediately regenerate, so that
   the top unit of the stack never has any damage on it. In other words, you
   can't kill a fraction of a Mummy; you have to kill entire Mummies.
3. Vultures. Flying. Whenever the last unit of a stack is killed, no matter
   what killed it, all Vultures that can teleport to that hex or an adjacent
   hex, and gain +1 speed, +2 damage, and +2 hit points, for the rest of
   combat.
4. Djinns. Range. At the start of a Djinn's turn, it casts a random low-level
   beneficial spell on a random friendly stack.
5. Guardians. Guardians can teleport to any hex adjacent to any of your other
   creatures; they can't keep moving after teleporting (but can attack).
6. Slavers. When Slavers attack a stack, before doing damage, you take control
   of 1 creature per Slaver. You keep these creatures at the end of combat, if
   you have space in your army. If there is no room for the new stack in
   combat, the Slavers kill that many creatures instead.

Scorpions are excellent, and remain good in the late game; Mummies are strong
at first, but not exceptional later. Sometimes a small stack simply can't
kill a Mummy. Vultures have a way of getting themselves killed, but are very
strong in large battles. Leadership is particularly good with Pyramid troops;
you want multiple stacks of Djinns, multiple small stacks of creatures to die
and feed the Vultures, and room in your army for Slaver-ed creatures. Slavers
are potentially extremely powerful, but they're frail, and the computer will
desperately try to kill them off.

Ruins

1. Rubber Rats. When Rubber Rats are melee attacked, they push the attacker
   back as far as it can go (until it hits an obstacle, a creature stack, or
   the edge of the combat field). This doesn't work against non-melee attacks,
   including spells, range attacks, and attacks that hit more than one hex
   (and don't hit the Rubber Rats directly).
2. Mosquito Clouds. Flying. When Mosquito Clouds damage a unit, they heal up
   to as much damage as they deal; this can bring back dead Mosquito Clouds,
   but can't increase a stack beyond its size at the start of combat.
3. Electric Eels. Range. When Electric Eels hit a stack, they also hit a
   random adjacent stack for half damage, and then a random adjacent stack
   other than the 1st one for a quarter damage. They can hit friendly stacks
   this way, but can't hit themselves (their attack won't chain through
   themselves either).
4. Flying Slugs. Flying. Flying Slugs leave a trail of water when they move.
   When they attack a hex, they turn that hex into water. A non-flying unit
   that starts a turn in water has half speed that turn.
5. Two-headed Giants. Two-headed Giants attack both forwards and backwards.
   They can damage friendly units this way. When Two-headed Giants attack a
   stack, that stack is split into 2 stacks, if there's room and more than 1
   surviving creature in the stack. Stacks split this way reform into one
   stack at the end of combat.
6. Fire Duikers. Fire Duikers have a long breath weapon, hitting the next
   3 hexes behind the attacked hex. This can hurt friendly units; the extra
   attacks aren't melee attacks; and Fire Duikers can attack hexes that are
   empty or have obstacles or friends, provided that one of the attacked
   hexes has an enemy. When the last Fire Duiker in a stack dies, it explodes,
   turning that hex and each adjacent hex to fire (which deals 200 damage to
   a unit starting a turn in one of those hexes).

The creatures in the Ruins are kind of tricky. The Rubber Rats ability is
usually a penalty, but they're still okay. It keeps monsters away from them,
so you're less likely to kill them with your Electric Eels. The splitting
ability of Two-headed Giants is surprisingly useful; it's also a combo with
the Electric Eels. The Eels themselves are strong, but it's very easy to end
up accidentally hitting your own troops with them, or skipping an attack so
that you don't. A big stack of Mosquito Clouds can be very hard to deal with;
you'll want to mop up at the end of combat with the Mosquito Clouds, rather
than kill everything as quickly as possible (unless fighting a Hero). Flying
Slugs can be used in a pinch to put out fires your creatures are standing in.

Thieves' Guild

1. Urchins. After Urchins attack, each adjacent enemy unit is pushed one hex
   away from the Urchins, if possible.
2. Lookouts. Range. At the start of a hero's turn (outside of combat), the
   hero gets +1 movement for that turn per 30 Lookouts in his army.
3. Sneaks. Sneaks can teleport to hexes adjacent to enemy monsters; they
   can't keep moving after teleporting (but can attack).
4. Ninjas. Flying. When Ninjas attack a unit, they exchange places with it.
5. Assassins. Before dealing damage, Assassins kill one attacked creature per
   Assassin.
6. Masterminds. Range. Masterminds hit all enemies at once. This works even
   if they make a non-range attack.

Lookouts are weak in combat, but the extra movement is excellent. Assassins
are strong against high level troops, but weak in earlier battles. Urchins
and Ninjas both have lackluster abilities, but they are useful sometimes
(especially when there's fire around), and both creatures have great stats.
Sneaks are excellent, often functioning like a ranged unit.

HERO SKILLS

When a hero goes up a level, he learns a skill. That's the entire
significance of going up a level (that, and you'll need more experience to go
up the next level).

Each hero can have 4 blue skills and 4 yellow skills. A blue skill is a skill
that can keep going up indefinitely. A yellow skill can only go up to 3rd
level. Heroes can have additional skills due to artifacts or map locations,
but your hero can only innately learn 8 skills.

In the explanations that follow, X is your skill level. It is your actual
total skill level, not just the level you've learned. So if you have
Offense 3 and a Sword of +2 Offense and just visited a Shrine of Offense,
you effectively have Offense 7, and would deal +70% damage.

Blue skills

- Archery. Your hero gets a range attack, which deals 50X damage. You get to
  use your range attack just prior to casting spells each round.
- Conjuring. At the start of each battle, your hero gets a stack of 700X gp
  of his friendly troop. This stack disappears at end of combat.
- Dark Arts. When enemy creatures die in combat (no matter how they die), you
  get Shadows (a creature found in the City of Shadows). You get X Shadows
  per 30 creatures killed. Fractional Shadows are remembered between battles.
  You get the Shadows immediately, during combat; if you already have a stack
  of Shadows, they join one of those stacks, and otherwise, a new stack is
  created near where the last creatures died.
- Defense. Your hero's troops have +10X% hit points, rounded up.
- Healing. Whenever one of your hero's stacks takes a turn in combat, it heals
  15X hit points. At the end of combat, your hero revives up to 400X gp of
  dead troops. Creatures are only revived if at least one creature in the
  stack survived. You get as many gp worth of creatures back as possible; if
  there's a tie you heal a random tying stack.
- Offense. Your hero's troops deal +10X% damage, rounded up.
- Pathfinding. Your hero moves an extra X hexes per day, and sees X hexes
  farther through the fog of war.
- Persuasion. When your hero attacks, before combat, you gain control of
  600X gp of enemy troops that are the same creature type as troops already
  in your army. This works for any battle, not just neutral monsters on the
  map. You keep these troops after combat.
- Power. Your hero's spells that deal damage deal more damage; your hero's
  spells that summon creatures summon more creatures; and the Blow spell
  blows things farther. The actual formula for damage/summoning depends on
  the spell; however it is always of the form N + 1.5NX. So Zap, for example,
  deals 50 damage, plus 75 damage per point of Power.
- Spellcraft. Your hero has +20X maximum spell points, and regains an extra
  +3X spell points each day.
- Summoning. Your hero produces creatures at the start of each day. You
  produce 200X gp of creatures of the type this hero is friendly with. Any
  fractional creatures are remembered for the next day.
- Warcraft. At the start of each battle, your hero gains 66X gp of his
  friendly troop, X spell points, and 0.1X movement points. Fractional troops
  and movement are remembered.

Yellow skills

- Alchemy. Your hero creates an artifact every 7 days, at the start of the
  day. The level of the artifact cycles between 1 and X. If you can't carry
  the artifact, you create one on the first day that you can. Your hero also
  has +X slots for gear artifacts.
- Cunning. Whenever your hero gains experience, he gains an extra +5X%. When
  your hero gets a choice of skills when going up a level, he gets an extra
  choice. With Cunning 2, your hero can have an extra blue skill; with Cunning
  3, he can have an extra yellow skill also.
- Expertise. Your hero specializes in a particular blue skill. At Expertise
  1, he is always offered that skill and gets double that skill from Schools.
  At Expertise 2, he also gains a bonus ability that varies by skill. At
  Expertise 3, all of your heroes (including this one) get +1 of that skill.
- Familiar. Your hero learns 1-3 spells which he can cast for half price once
  per battle. At 1st level you get a 1st level spell; at 2nd level you either
  upgrade it to 2nd level or get another 1st level spell; at 3rd level you
  either have 3 1st level, a 1st and a 2nd, or a 3rd level spell.
- Insight. Your hero has +1 level of X of his other yellow skills, or all of
  them at Insight 3. For some skills (generally ones which can't naturally go
  up to 4th level) you instead gain a related ability.
- Leadership. Your hero has +X army slots.
- Lore. Whenever your hero goes up a level, he learns a spell. You get to
  pick between 2 spells, one level X, the other level X + 1. Also, your
  spells cost X spell points less to cast per level of spell.
- Sorcery. Your spells with targets can have an additional +X targets. Power
  and Witchcraft are divided by the number of targets. You don't need to use
  all of the targets you can.
- Specialty. When you get this skill you choose a creature type for your
  hero's castle type. That creature type gets +10X% damage and hit points,
  and +0.5X speed, for the first two levels. At Specialty 3 that creature
  gains an ability (in addition to the previous boost). The ability will
  usually be something some other creature normally has, and will sometimes
  be exciting, but not always. The special abilities for your castle type
  are displayed when you pick the creature type to specialize in.
- Tactics. Your hero's troops have +0.5X speed.
- Witchcraft. Your hero's spells last an extra +X combat rounds. Your spells
  with a % have a better %. "Good" spells are +20% normally, and get +20X%.
  "Evil" spells are -15% normally, and are -25%, -35%, and -50%, for
  Witchcraft 1-3. 
- Wizardry. Your hero can use an additional +10X spell points during each
  combat round. Your hero has +2X speed in combat, for spellcasting and
  Archery.

SPELLS

There are 36 spells, divided into 4 levels. Higher level spells cost more
spell points to cast, and are harder to acquire.

Each hero starts out knowing one spell. Spells can be learned from Spell
Crypts and Spell Towers in castles; from Spell Pavilions and Libraries on
the map; from the Lore skill; and from artifacts. There are 4 spells that
will never appear in castles or Spell Pavilions; you will usually need Lore
to learn them. They are: Mental Blast, Mind Blank, Grenade, and Joy.

In the descriptions below, P is the spellcasting hero's Power skill * 1.5 + 1,
and W is a value based on the hero's Witchcraft skill (+20/+40/+60/+80 or
-15/-25/-35/-50). Spells cast other ways, such as by Djinns or artifacts,
have their own values.

Good spells target a friendly stack. Evil spells target an enemy stack.
Neutral spells can target either. Duration spells last a number of rounds
based on the hero's Witchcraft skill (or 1 round by default). A stack can
have multiple Duration spells on it at once, but only one copy of each; the
last one cast overrides the previous one. Also a stack can't have two
Duration spells on it with opposing effects; the earlier-cast spell is
dispelled. So for example if a monster has Grow on it, you will remove that
spell if you cast Grow, Shrink, Woe, or Joy on it.

Level 1

- Bad Luck. Evil, Duration. A stack deals minimum damage.
- Blow. Neutral. Moves a stack 3 hexes towards the enemy side of the field.
- Deserter. Evil. Kills a single creature outright.
- Fly. Neutral, Duration. A stack gains flying.
- Fury. Good, Duration. A stack deals +W% damage.
- Good Luck. Good, Duration. A stack deals maximum damage.
- Grow. Good, Duration. A stack has +W% hit points.
- Mental Blast. Evil. Deals 15P to each enemy stack.
- Swarm. Evil, Duration. Deals 30P damage now, and 30P damage each round.
- Zap. Evil. Deals 50P damage to a stack.

Level 2

- Agility. Good, Duration. A stack gets +W% speed.
- Conjure. Create 10P Bunnies in an empty hex. You lose them at the end of
  combat.
- Fatigue. Evil, Duration. A stack gets -W% speed.
- Fire Bolt. Evil. Deals 100P damage to a stack, and sets that hex on fire.
  This will deal 200 more damage if the stack starts a turn there.
- Heal. Good. Removes all enemy spells from a stack (even neutral ones), as
  well as negative effects like being hexed. Heals the stack to full hit
  points and brings back one dead creature.
- Mind Blank. Neutral, Duration. A stack loses its abilities.
- Mud Ball. Evil. Deals 100P damage to a stack, and turns that hex into water.
  This slows the stack down to half speed if it starts a turn there and
  doesn't fly.
- Shrink. Evil, Duration. A stack gets -W% hit points.
- Traitor. Evil. Gain control of a single creature from a stack. You keep
  this creature after combat, if there's room for it in your army. If there's
  no adjacent empty hex in combat to put the creature in, it kills a creature
  instead.
- Weakness. Evil, Duration. A stack deals -W% damage.

Level 3

- Fire Shield. Sets each hex adjacent to any of your stacks on fire, but not
  any of the hexes any of your stacks are in. The fire will do 200 damage at
  the start of a stack's turn to a stack in that hex.
- Grenade. Evil. Deals 50P damage to a stack, and to each adjacent hex. Any
  obstacles in those hexes are destroyed (but not fire or water).
- Ice Bolt. Evil, Duration. Deals 150P damage to a stack (once), and that
  stack has -2 speed.
- Kill. Kills P creatures outright.
- Magic Bow. Good, Duration. A stack gains a range attack.
- Sicken. Evil. Stack is stunned (it can't move the next time it would
  normally get to) and diseased (it has -2 hit points, -2 damage, -1 speed).
- Vampire. Good, Duration. A stack gains the drain life ability that Mosquito
  Clouds have; when it deals damage, it will heal that many hit points, and
  this can bring back dead creatures, but can't increase the stack beyond its
  original size.
- Vengeance. Good, Duration. A stack gains the ability to retaliate against
  melee attacks. This does not include range attacks, spells, or attacks that
  hit multiple hexes that aren't aimed directly at it.

Level 4

- Inferno. Deals 100P damage to each enemy stack, and sets all of those hexes
  on fire. The fire will deal 200 damage to a stack that starts a turn in it.
- Joy. Duration. All of your stacks get +W% hit points, damage, and speed.
- Multiply. Good. A stack gains creatures equal to a % of the creatures in the
  stack - either 2, 4, 6, or 8%, based on the hero's level of Witchcraft.
  These creatures are kept after combat ends.
- Polymorph. Evil, Duration. Turns a stack into the next lowest level creature
  for that castle type (unless it's already 1st level).
- Renew. Good. Heals a stack (like the Heal spell). That stack gets an extra
  turn this round (whether or not it has gone already this round).
- Shapeshift. Good, Duration. Turns a stack into the next highest level
  creature for that castle type (unless it's already 6th level).
- Summon. Creates a stack of 10P random 3rd level creatures in an empty hex.
  You lose these creatures at the end of combat.
- Woe. Duration. All enemy stacks get -W% hit points, damage, and speed.

TWISTS

There are 24 twists. They may be chosen directly or randomly, and modify the
game rules to create a variety of game experiences. Don't play with these
until you've played a bunch of normal games.

- Heroes have +14 movement. That's per day. Be prepared to zip around.
- Heroes earn double XP. This applies to Chests, Monuments, etc., as well as
  to battles.
- Heroes have +1 of each blue skill. There are 12 blue skills and you start
  at level 1 in each. This is not part of your innate skills; you still get
  the normal 4 blue skills that you learn.
- Heroes have a normal maximum of 4 skills. That's 2 blue skills and 2 yellow
  skills. You will end up really specializing in something.
- All heroes start with the same random artifact. It's a low-level artifact.
- All heroes start with the same random skill. It can be blue or yellow.
- Starting heroes start with the same random monster stack. The stack can
  range in power level from 1200 to 4800 gp worth of monsters, of any level.
  Other heroes you buy will not have the stack - only your starting hero (and
  not your 2nd starting hero if you play with that twist also).
- When one of your heroes gains XP, they all do. Basically all of your heroes
  will be as good as your best one. Even later in the game, when you buy a
  new hero, he will quickly shoot up levels to be almost as good as your old
  heroes (not counting artifacts etc.).
- Castles start with more obstacles. This applies to both normal castles and
  outposts; outposts will be really cramped.
- Castle dwellings have double cost and production. This is like having
  buildings that are half as big, only you need to buy them two at a time.
- All castles start with the same random building. It can be a creature
  dwelling or other building. It will match its castle type.
- Castles buildings decay over time. The rate depends on the size of the
  building - it's 10 days, plus 4 days per square. When a building decays it
  vanishes from your castle; the space may be re-used.
- A random level of castle dwelling only takes one square. The dwelling still
  produces creatures as if it were the normal number of squares.
- Castle creature types are mixed up. The 1st level creature type for each
  castle stays the same. The other levels are all offset by a random number.
  So maybe City of Shadows will have Shadows, Giant Frogs, Will-o-wisps,
  Djinns, Guardians, and Mad Scientists. You can see what you're getting on
  the screen where you choose your starting castle type. Each monster will
  still only appear in one castle type.
- All monsters have the same random ability. It can be almost any ability
  that any monster ever has, including a few artifact-only abilities. You
  can't get the Cloud Giant obstacle-destroying ability this way (which slows
  down combat too much without being interesting), or the trail-of-fire
  ability (which would just kill many stacks before they moved), or stun
  (too ridiculous and dull on shooters), or the Clown Car ability (too hard
  to finish battles). That still leaves some pretty wacky possible games.
  When you choose this twist, you will sometimes want to reject the ability
  you ended up with, and start a fresh game.
- No range in jungle or flying in snow; slow in wasteland. Range units simply
  lose that ability in jungles, and fliers lose flying in snow; in desolate
  terrain, units with neither ability have -1 speed. You get reminded of
  these hard-to-remember things in the combat log.
- Players start with an extra hero. You don't get to pick him.
- Players can only have two heroes. You can still buy new heroes, and buy
  heroes back when they die, but you can only own two heroes at once.
- No actions are possible on the last two days of each week. Those turns go
  by fast. Basically this means you have a 5-day week, which makes stuff like
  Alchemy more powerful, and means that every 5 days you get a bonanza of
  resources and creatures available.
- All resource piles are the same. They will all be one resource, anything
  from gold to clay. You can still get other resources from mines, Barrels,
  etc.
- Buildings that improve heroes are one-use. When you visit a School, Spell
  Pavilion, etc., if it did something for you, it turns into a rock. It stays
  there if it couldn't help your hero. Other buildings like Dwellings are
  unaffected.
- Forests gradually die. Every turn some trees on the map are replaced with
  open space. This will eventually let you sometimes pick up treasures
  without fighting monsters, or will open up new paths between castles.
- Dwellings gradually appear in empty places on the map. Every day a few
  dwellings will appear. They never completely block off any spot that was
  accessible before. They are normal dwellings. They increase in level over
  the course of the game.
- Water on the map periodically floods and retreats. The water advances just
  one hex, and never farther, from the starting position; but that's enough
  to cut off paths and trap heroes. It is more likely to retreat than to
  flood.

TECHNICAL / MISCELLANEOUS

CONFIG.DAT is a text file consisting of two lines with positive integers in
ASCII. The first line has the factor for how long animation delays in combat
last. The default is 100, and it's a %. A bigger number makes the game run
slower; a smaller number makes it run faster. 200 will mean double the normal
delays, while 50 would mean half the normal delays. Use 1 if you want to
completely eliminate the delays. The second line has the amount of delay
when scrolling on the map using the mouse. The default is 5; a bigger number
means more delay, a smaller number less delay. Edit this file using a text
editor like Notepad, not using a word processor.

SAVEGAME.DAT contains your saved game. You normally can have only one saved
game. If you must have more, copy SAVEGAME.DAT to another file, and/or copy
that file to SAVEGAME.DAT.

You can press Alt-P on some screens to get a screen capture into SCREEN.BMP.

Dudes is a DOS program. DOS is no longer with us, but is generally well
supported by Windows 98, Windows ME, and Windows XP, all of which Dudes has
been tested on. Dudes runs in 640x480x256 VGA graphics mode. Your computer or
monitor may require tweaking to make that work. But the odds are that the
only thing you have to do is to make a shortcut to Dudes, and then edit the
preferences for the shortcut (say, by setting 640x480 mode).

You can make your own random map templates with a text editor. Copy one of
the .RMT files to a new DOS-compatible filename with the .RMT extension (say,
a 1-8 -letter name, plus ".RMT). Edit the file in a text editor (not a word
processor). "*" means solid obstacle; " " means open; "1"-"8" indicates a
starting castle; "a".."h" indicates an outpost associated with a starting
castle; "@" means a central neutral castle; "$" means any other neutral
castle; "%" means any other neutral outpost. You can only have one of each
number, and must have each number in sequence from 1 to your highest number.
You can have more than one letter per number, and can have more of some
letters than others, and can have multiple $'s and %'s, but can't have more
than 25 total castles/outposts on the map. The outer wall of *'s has to be
there, and any coordinate with an odd X and odd Y has to be a *. If making
random map templates interests you, fiddle around with it, eventually you'll
get it right. All of the .RMT files are examples. If you blow it the program
may crash when you start it, or else the map may be screwed up somehow. Just
go back into your text editor and keep fiddling with it.
